README.md, before:

# ZoneNet: AI Object Counter & Analytics | Custom Region Tracking w/ YOLO11 👁️

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)
![YOLO11](https://img.shields.io/badge/YOLO-11-green)

ZoneNet is a professional-grade **Computer Vision** application designed for precise **Real-time Object Counting** and **Video Analytics**. Leveraging the power of **YOLO11** and **ByteTrack**, it allows users to define **Custom Regions of Interest (ROI)** for accurate tracking in retail, traffic management, livestock management,and industrial safety scenarios. Built with Flask and Tailwind CSS, it offers a seamless, local-first solution for data-driven insights.

![ZoneNet AI Object Counting Demo with Custom Polygon Zones](demo/demo.gif)

## 🚀 Features

- **Custom Region of Interest (ROI)**: Draw specific polygons on your video to precision-count objects only within defined areas. Perfect for specific lane counting or zone monitoring.
- **Dynamic Object Selection**: Select ANY of the 80 COCO classes (Person, Car, Bicycle, etc.) to track and count. No code changes required!
- **Model Selection**: Switch between YOLO11 Nano (fastest) to XLarge (most accurate) depending on your needs.
- **Adjustable Confidence**: Fine-tune detection sensitivity with a built-in confidence threshold slider (Default: 35%).
- **Accurate Tracking**: Uses **ByteTrack** for robust object tracking and consistency.
- **Real-time Detection**: Powered by the state-of-the-art **YOLO11** model for low-latency processing.
- **Live Camera Support 📹**: Connect to RTSP streams or webcams for real-time monitoring and counting.
- **Advanced Analytics 📊**: 
  - Rolling time-series charts with peak detection markers
  - Rate-of-change indicators (objects/min)
  - **Alert Thresholds**: Visual + audio alerts when counts exceed set limits
  - **Dwell Time Analysis**: Track how long objects remain in zones
  - **Activity Heatmaps**: Visualize busy periods with color-coded intensity
- **Data Export 💾**: Download detection data as **CSV** or **JSON** (includes computed statistics).
- **History & Management**: Automatically saves processed jobs. Rename or delete past tasks easily.
- **Privacy-First**: All processing happens locally on your machine. No video data is sent to the cloud.

## 🎯 Target Use Cases

- **Retail Analytics**: Count customer footfall in specific store aisles or entryways.
- **Traffic Management**: Monitor vehicle flow, classify vehicle types (cars, trucks, buses), and analyze lane usage.
- **Industrial Safety**: Monitor restricted zones for unauthorized personnel entry.
- **Smart Cities**: Analyze usage of public spaces, parks, and walkways.
- **Livestock Monitoring**: Track and count animals (cows, sheep) in fields or enclosures.

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Backend**: Python, Flask, SQLite (for job persistence)
- **AI/ML**: OpenCV, Ultralytics YOLO11, ByteTrack
- **Frontend**: Tailwind CSS v4, Jinja2, Vanilla JS
- **Package Management**: [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) (Python), npm (CSS)

## 🐳 Docker Quick Start

The fastest way to run ZoneNet. Requires [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).

```bash
# Clone and run
git clone https://github.com/Kongesque/zonenet.git
cd zonenet
docker-compose up --build
```

Open `http://127.0.0.1:5000` — that's it!

<details>
<summary><strong>🎮 GPU Acceleration (Optional)</strong></summary>

For **NVIDIA GPU** users with [nvidia-container-toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/install-guide.html):

1. Edit `docker-compose.yml` and uncomment the `zonenet-gpu` service
2. Comment out the default `zonenet` service
3. Run with: `docker-compose up --build`

ZoneNet auto-detects GPU availability. Check the badge in the header (green = GPU, gray = CPU).

*Apple Silicon users: GPU acceleration (MPS) works automatically with native install.*
</details>

---

## 📦 Installation (Manual)

This project uses `uv` for lightning-fast Python dependency management and `npm` for styling.

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Kongesque/zonenet.git
   cd zonenet
   ```

2. **Install `uv` (if not already installed):**
   ```bash
   curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
   ```
   *For other installation methods (pip, etc.), refer to the [uv documentation](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/).*

3. **Install Python dependencies:**
   ```bash
   uv sync
   ```

4. **Install CSS dependencies & build:**
   ```bash
   npm install
   npm run build
   ```

5. **(Optional) Offline / Batch Model Setup:** 
   If you plan to run ZoneNet in an offline environment or want to pre-download all model sizes (Nano to XLarge) at once:
   ```bash
   python download_models.py
   ```

## 🎮 Usage

1. **Start the application:**
   ```bash
   uv run app.py
   ```

2. **Open the Web UI:**
   Navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.

3. **Workflow:**
   - **Upload**: Drop a video file (MP4, WebM) on the main board.
   - **Configure**:
     - **Draw Logic**: Click to define the polygon points for your counting zone.
     - **Target Object**: Select what you want to count (e.g., "Person", "Car", "Cow") from the sidebar.
     - **Confidence**: Adjust the sensitivity slider (40% recommended).
   - **Process**: Click "Process" to start the AI analysis.
   - **Result**: Watch the processed video with real-time counting and download the result.

## ⚙️ Advanced Configuration

### Object Classes
ZoneNet maps the standard **COCO 80 classes**. You can select these directly from the UI. 

### Model Selection
- **YOLO11n (Nano)**: Fastest, use for real-time preview (Default).
- **YOLO11s/m (Small/Medium)**: Balanced for general use.
- **YOLO11l/x (Large/XLarge)**: Best accuracy for small or distant objects, slower processing. 
*(Note: Larger models will be automatically downloaded on first use if not present locally.)* 

### Confidence Threshold
- **Lower (~10-20%)**: Catches more objects but may include false positives (e.g., seeing a "car" in a shadow).
- **Default (35%)**: The "sweet spot" balanced for general tracking.
- **Higher (>60%)**: Only counts objects the model is extremely sure about.

### ByteTrack Tracking Settings
Fine-tune the tracking algorithm via the collapsible **Advanced Tracking Settings** panel:

| Parameter | Description | Default |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **Detection Quality** | Higher = cleaner tracks, fewer false positives | 0.45 |
| **Recovery Sensitivity** | Lower = better recovery of occluded objects | 0.10 |
| **Match Threshold** | Lower = more lenient matching, fewer ID switches | 0.80 |
| **Track Memory** | Frames to remember lost tracks (10-120) | 30 |

*Tip: Increase Track Memory for videos with frequent occlusions or objects leaving/entering frame.*

Commit message:

features: line crossing counter for in/out direction

README.md, after:

# ZoneNet: AI Object Counter & Analytics | Custom Region Tracking w/ YOLO11 👁️

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)
![YOLO11](https://img.shields.io/badge/YOLO-11-green)

ZoneNet is a professional-grade **Computer Vision** application designed for precise **Real-time Object Counting** and **Video Analytics**. Leveraging the power of **YOLO11** and **ByteTrack**, it allows users to define **Custom Regions of Interest (ROI)** for accurate tracking in retail, traffic management, livestock management,and industrial safety scenarios. Built with Flask and Tailwind CSS, it offers a seamless, local-first solution for data-driven insights.

![ZoneNet AI Object Counting Demo with Custom Polygon Zones](demo/demo.gif)

## 🚀 Features

- **Custom Region of Interest (ROI)**: Draw specific polygons on your video to precision-count objects only within defined areas. Perfect for specific lane counting or zone monitoring.
- **Line Crossing Counter 🚶**: Draw a 2-point line to track entries and exits with **IN/OUT direction detection**. Perfect for doorway counting, traffic lanes, and occupancy tracking.
- **Dynamic Object Selection**: Select ANY of the 80 COCO classes (Person, Car, Bicycle, etc.) to track and count. No code changes required!
- **Model Selection**: Switch between YOLO11 Nano (fastest) to XLarge (most accurate) depending on your needs.
- **Adjustable Confidence**: Fine-tune detection sensitivity with a built-in confidence threshold slider (Default: 35%).
- **Accurate Tracking**: Uses **ByteTrack** for robust object tracking and consistency.
- **Real-time Detection**: Powered by the state-of-the-art **YOLO11** model for low-latency processing.
- **Live Camera Support 📹**: Connect to RTSP streams or webcams for real-time monitoring and counting.
- **Advanced Analytics 📊**: 
  - Rolling time-series charts with peak detection markers
  - Rate-of-change indicators (objects/min)
  - **Alert Thresholds**: Visual + audio alerts when counts exceed set limits
  - **Dwell Time Analysis**: Track how long objects remain in zones
  - **Activity Heatmaps**: Visualize busy periods with color-coded intensity
- **Data Export 💾**: Download detection data as **CSV** or **JSON** (includes computed statistics).
- **History & Management**: Automatically saves processed jobs. Rename or delete past tasks easily.
- **Privacy-First**: All processing happens locally on your machine. No video data is sent to the cloud.

## 🎯 Target Use Cases

- **Retail Analytics**: Count customer footfall in specific store aisles or entryways.
- **Traffic Management**: Monitor vehicle flow, classify vehicle types (cars, trucks, buses), and analyze lane usage.
- **Industrial Safety**: Monitor restricted zones for unauthorized personnel entry.
- **Smart Cities**: Analyze usage of public spaces, parks, and walkways.
- **Livestock Monitoring**: Track and count animals (cows, sheep) in fields or enclosures.

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Backend**: Python, Flask, SQLite (for job persistence)
- **AI/ML**: OpenCV, Ultralytics YOLO11, ByteTrack
- **Frontend**: Tailwind CSS v4, Jinja2, Vanilla JS
- **Package Management**: [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) (Python), npm (CSS)

## 🐳 Docker Quick Start

The fastest way to run ZoneNet. Requires [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).

```bash
# Clone and run
git clone https://github.com/Kongesque/zonenet.git
cd zonenet
docker-compose up --build
```

Open `http://127.0.0.1:5000` — that's it!

<details>
<summary><strong>🎮 GPU Acceleration (Optional)</strong></summary>

For **NVIDIA GPU** users with [nvidia-container-toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/install-guide.html):

1. Edit `docker-compose.yml` and uncomment the `zonenet-gpu` service
2. Comment out the default `zonenet` service
3. Run with: `docker-compose up --build`

ZoneNet auto-detects GPU availability. Check the badge in the header (green = GPU, gray = CPU).

*Apple Silicon users: GPU acceleration (MPS) works automatically with native install.*
</details>

---

## 📦 Installation (Manual)

This project uses `uv` for lightning-fast Python dependency management and `npm` for styling.

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Kongesque/zonenet.git
   cd zonenet
   ```

2. **Install `uv` (if not already installed):**
   ```bash
   curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
   ```
   *For other installation methods (pip, etc.), refer to the [uv documentation](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/).*

3. **Install Python dependencies:**
   ```bash
   uv sync
   ```

4. **Install CSS dependencies & build:**
   ```bash
   npm install
   npm run build
   ```

5. **(Optional) Offline / Batch Model Setup:** 
   If you plan to run ZoneNet in an offline environment or want to pre-download all model sizes (Nano to XLarge) at once:
   ```bash
   python download_models.py
   ```

## 🎮 Usage

1. **Start the application:**
   ```bash
   uv run app.py
   ```

2. **Open the Web UI:**
   Navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.

3. **Workflow:**
   - **Upload**: Drop a video file (MP4, WebM) on the main board.
   - **Configure**:
     - **Draw Logic**: Click to define the polygon points for your counting zone.
     - **Target Object**: Select what you want to count (e.g., "Person", "Car", "Cow") from the sidebar.
     - **Confidence**: Adjust the sensitivity slider (40% recommended).
   - **Process**: Click "Process" to start the AI analysis.
   - **Result**: Watch the processed video with real-time counting and download the result.

## ⚙️ Advanced Configuration

### Object Classes
ZoneNet maps the standard **COCO 80 classes**. You can select these directly from the UI. 

### Model Selection
- **YOLO11n (Nano)**: Fastest, use for real-time preview (Default).
- **YOLO11s/m (Small/Medium)**: Balanced for general use.
- **YOLO11l/x (Large/XLarge)**: Best accuracy for small or distant objects, slower processing. 
*(Note: Larger models will be automatically downloaded on first use if not present locally.)* 

### Confidence Threshold
- **Lower (~10-20%)**: Catches more objects but may include false positives (e.g., seeing a "car" in a shadow).
- **Default (35%)**: The "sweet spot" balanced for general tracking.
- **Higher (>60%)**: Only counts objects the model is extremely sure about.

### ByteTrack Tracking Settings
Fine-tune the tracking algorithm via the collapsible **Advanced Tracking Settings** panel:

| Parameter | Description | Default |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **Detection Quality** | Higher = cleaner tracks, fewer false positives | 0.45 |
| **Recovery Sensitivity** | Lower = better recovery of occluded objects | 0.10 |
| **Match Threshold** | Lower = more lenient matching, fewer ID switches | 0.80 |
| **Track Memory** | Frames to remember lost tracks (10-120) | 30 |

*Tip: Increase Track Memory for videos with frequent occlusions or objects leaving/entering frame.*
